---
title: Linkedin
date: 2025-11-09
description: Things that I consider strange for a professional social platform
image: /blog-images/cows.webp
alt: ""
tags:
  - Internet
draft: false
---

## Linkedin

I've heard many suggestions about my career such as:

> At least you need a good Linkedin profile so people can know you. Its important for showcasing your skills. It's essential for a professional social network.

So one day, i give it a try and created new account. at first, i had no one to connect with so i just sent bunch of connection request to random people. i just thinking it's the right thing to do at the time.

the atmosphere of LinkedIn for a newcomer like me, feel weird. i note some of them in the headings down blow.

## Fake positivity, humbleness and appreciation

You often encounter people who want to connect with you and they seems really care about you even when you didn't had any meaningful relationship with them. I think the fact is, many users are just eager to expand their networks.

## Self-Congratulation

If you have a Linkedin account and are fairly active on it, go ahead and pull up your LinkedIn right now. Now scroll down. how many posts are about someone congratulating themselves?

I get a LOT of these. It seems like most of the posts are just someone sharing their latest achievement, whether it’s landing a new job, receiving an award, or completing a project.

::info
I know, while it’s great to celebrate accomplishments, the frequency of these posts can feel nonsense and overwhelming. specially for the people who are don't have any job or significant project.
::

## The posts

The types of posts that appear on LinkedIn are... strange. I mean, most of them are. there is even a dedicated subreddit for this [subject](https://www.reddit.com/r/LinkedInLunatics/).

For example:

1. A post about someone that explains their experience of divorcing with his wife.
2. A post about a person that sharing their bad experience of some famous food delivery service 
3. A post about highly controversial topics. Religion, politics ...

## Do i really need this thing?

Currently, I'm struggling with social media addiction. By social media, I don't mean the ordinary ones like Instagram and Facebook; I am referring to LinkedIn, YouTube, and Telegram. People often exclude these three when talking about the harmful effects of social media, but i believe they are the same is some aspects.

But let's think about this: Is LinkedIn really that vital our success in my career?

My experience with LinkedIn probably stems from the fact that i don't have a single industry standard connection in the first place. But besides that, I'm not that kind of person who can benefit from that.

I don't know. But i feel focusing on myself is the right thing to do for now.

I've watched a video about quitting Social Media and it is somehow relates to [this kind of objections](https://youtu.be/3E7hkPZ-HTk?si=xcdO0hexCNoZpj14\&t=281) for using social media.

The speaker in the video said something like this (in directly): "All that you need for landing a good job, Is a good amount of deep work. Cause everything in the market falls in places like that. People will find you. you don't need things like self-presentation in these platforms."

What do you think about this? 
