---
draft: true
tags: []
title: How to not die
---

## Hydration

Hydration is **the body's ability to absorb water, the vital liquid it needs, and is based on how much is available to it**. Every cell, tissue, and organ requires fluid to perform functions such as maintaining temperature, disposing of waste products and etc...

About 70% of an adult body is made up of water. We all need water to survive, yet there are many misconceptions about this basic element of life.

**The primary mechanism by which we maintain our hydration is thirst.** Thirst is a powerful emotion that motivates us to eat and drink. Thirst is actually serves two functions in our body.

- It regulates the concentration of salt and electrolytes in our blood.
- It regulates the overall volume of water in our body.

The other mechanism that regulates fluid in our body is urination. Urine color is actually a pretty good measure of the hydration state of your body.

Another way our body loses water is through sweating. sweating primarily is a mechanism to regulate body temperature, but it involves excreting saline from our [sweat glands](https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/hyperhidrosis/multimedia/sweat-glands/img-20007980).

What about myths?

> Average human needs to drink 8 glass of water everyday

This myth originates from `food and nutrition board` which calculated the average water need for average adult with average activity and environment. And they came up with this result. However in the same report they also noted that most people get 20% of their fluid intake from food. Even if you need 8 glass of water, that doesn't necessarily means it has to be pure water.

> By the time you're thirsty, it's too late. It means you are already dehydrated

Being thirsty != dehydrated

In general, you can actually rely on your thirst emotion. because you will become thirsty long before you are actually dehydrated. Thirst works and you don't have to force fluid when you don't feel like drinking.

## Diet and nutrition

## Weight loss

## Appeal to nature
